


[TITLE]Common QTL Affect the Rate of Tomato Seed Germination under Different Stress and Nonstress Conditions




[Abstract]The purpose of this study was to determine whether the rates of tomato seed germination under 
        different stress and nonstress conditions were under common genetic controls by examining 
        quantitative trait loci (QTL) affecting such traits. Seeds 
        of BC1 progeny of a 
        cross between a
        slow-germinating tomato breeding line and a rapid-germinating tomato wild accession were 
        evaluated for germination under nonstress as well as cold, salt, and drought stress conditions. In 
        each treatment, the most rapidly-germinating seeds were selected, grown to maturity, and 
        subjected to molecular marker analysis. A selective genotyping approach detected between 6 and 
        9 QTL affecting germination rate under each of the four conditions, with a total of 14 QTL 
        identified. Ten QTL affected germination rate under 2 or 3 conditions, which were considered 
        germination-related common QTL. Four QTL affected germination rate only in one treatment, 
        which were considered germination-related, condition-specific QTL . The results indicated that 
        mostly the same QTL  affected seed germination under different stress and nonstress conditions, 
        supporting a previous suggestion that similar physiological mechanisms contribute to rapid seed 
        germination under different conditions. Marker-assisted selection for the common QTL may 
        result in progeny with rapid seed germinability under different conditions.



[MainText]1. INTRODUCTIONThe
ability of the 
seed to germinate rapidly and uniformly under different
environmental conditions is a desirable characteristic for most crop plants,
including tomato, Solanum lycopersicum L. Seed germination 
is particularly important if the target environment is less
than optimal during germination. Unfavorable conditions may lead to decreased
rate and final percentage of seed germination, which may result in poor stand
establishment and low crop yield. Under optimal germination conditions (e.g., 
T = 20–25°C and
external water potential of approximately 0 kPa), most tomato seeds germinate
within 2–5 days. Under
stress conditions, such as extreme temperatures, high soil salinity, and water
deficit, however, germination is delayed or completely inhibited depending on
the intensity and duration of stress as well as genetic background of the seed.
In some tomato-growing areas, the crop is established by sowing seeds directly
into the field instead of using transplants. Presence of environmental
stresses, however, restricts establishment of direct-seeded crops. Most
commercial cultivars of tomato are sensitive to environmental stresses during
seed germination and early seedling growth [1–3]. Such sensitivity renders limitations in
tomato production in stress environments. Chilling sensitivity during seed
germination, for example, precludes early seeding of tomatoes in the field in
temperate regions and necessitates expensive heating for greenhouse production
of transplants. Similarly, salt- or drought-stress sensitivity during seed
germination restricts establishment of direct-seeded crops in agricultural
lands affected by salt and/or water stress.Genetic variation exists within tomato Solanum species for rapid seed
germination under stress conditions [2, 4–6]. Such variation is potentially useful for
development of cultivars with improved germination ability under stress
conditions. Breeding for stress tolerance, however, requires knowledge of the
genetic control of stress tolerance and of the relationships among tolerances
to different stresses. Previous investigations indicated that the ability of
tomato seed to germinate rapidly under stress conditions, such as high or low
temperatures and salt or drought stress, was genetically 
controlled [3–5, 7, 8]. Furthermore, a few studies demonstrated
that in tomato selection for rapid seed germination under one stress condition
(e.g., cold, salt, or drought) resulted in progeny with improved germination
under different stress conditions 
[8, 9], suggesting presence of genetic
relationships among tolerances to different stresses. Furthermore, these
studies indicated that selection for rapid germination under stress condition
resulted in progeny with improved germination under nonstress condition. Results
of these studies supported a previous suggestion that similar physiological
mechanisms may control the rate of seed germination under different
environmental conditions [10]. However, for scientific reasons as well
as practical purposes, it is important to determine whether the same or
different genes control the rate of tomato seed germination under different
stress and nonstress conditions.Tomato seed germination under different
conditions exhibits continuous distributions, typical of quantitative traits [3, 7]. During the past several decades,
biometrical genetic models have facilitated characterization of genetic
controls of quantitative traits, including seed-related characteristics. Such
models, however, have not been adequate for determining the number and
chromosomal location of genes controlling quantitative traits or examining the
basis of genetic relationships among traits at the molecular level. Molecular
marker technology, on the other hand, has provided more accurate methods of
investigating genetic controls of quantitative traits and discerning genetic
relationships among traits. The goal of the present study is to determine whether
the same or different quantitative trait loci (QTL) control the rate of tomato
seed germination under different stress (cold, salt, and drought) and nonstress
conditions by identifying and comparing QTL affecting such traits.An effective approach to identifying genetic linkage between marker
loci and QTL is trait-based
marker analysis [11, 12], also know as selective genotyping [13, 14] or distributional extreme analysis [15]. The basis for this technique is that
allele frequencies of genes (or QTL) affecting a trait are expected to change
in response to directional selection for the trait. Selection would result in
an increase in frequency of favorable alleles in the high class (e.g., fast
germinators) and a decrease in the frequency of favorable alleles in the low
class (e.g., slow germinators). For simply inherited traits (e.g., single-gene
traits), such a change in allele frequency can easily be monitored in
subsequent generations of selection. For quantitative traits, on the other
hand, changes in QTL allele frequencies cannot be determined because QTL
genotypes are not known. However, if some marker loci are associated with the
segregating QTL (due to pleiotropic effect or physical linkage), the marker
allele frequencies will also change (via
“hitchhiking”) in response to selection. Any 
significant change in marker
allele frequencies in response to selection, therefore, can be attributed to
association of marker loci with QTL(s) affecting the trait under 
selection [11–14, 16]. In a trait-based marker analysis,
marker-QTL associations can be identified either by conducting a bidirectional
selection, where selection is made for both high and low classes of a response
distribution [17, 
18], or by conducting a unidirectional
selection, where selection is made only for a high or a low class [12]. In the former case, marker-QTL
associations are determined by testing the statistical significance of the
marker allele frequency differences between the two extreme classes. In the
latter scheme, marker-QTL associations can be determined by testing the
difference between marker allele frequencies in the selected class and those in
a nonselected population of the same cross. In the present study, a
unidirectional selective genotyping approach was employed to identify and
compare QTL contributing to rapid seed germination under nonstress as well as
cold-, salt-, and drought-stress conditions.2. MATERIALS AND METHODS2.1. Plant materialsThe tomato breeding line NC84173 was
hybridized (as pistillate parent) with a fast germinating accession (LA722) of
tomato wild species S. pimpinellifolium 
L. and F1 progeny was
produced. NC84173 is a horticulturally superior advanced tomato breeding line
(PVP) that is sensitive to cold, salt, and drought stress during seed
germination and LA722 is a self-compatible accession that germinates rapidly
under most conditions, including nonstress and cold, salt, and drought stress.
Original seed of NC84173 and LA722 were obtained 
from RG Gardner, North
Carolina State University (Fletcher, NC, USA) and CM Rick Tomato Genetics
Resource Center, University of California (Davis, Calif, USA), respectively. A
single F1 plant was used as 
pollen parent to hybridize plants of
NC84173 to produce BC1 seed. The BC1 population was used
for trait evaluation, genetic mapping, and identification QTL.2.2. Germination
evaluation of the parents and BC1 populationSterile germination media, containing
either 0.8% w/v agar 
(for nonstress as well as cold- and salt-stress
treatments) or 0.3% w/v Phytagel 
(for drought-stress treatment), were prepared.
For the drought treatment, Phytagel 
(Sigma-Aldrich, Miss, USA) was used as a
gelling agent as agar does not gel with drought agent polyethyleneglycol (PEG).
The germination medium for the salt treatment also 
included 150 mM 
NaCl + 15 mM
CaCl2 
and that for the drought treatment included 14% PEG.
Germination media were prepared in 15-cm round Petri plates. The water
potentials (ψ) of the
treatment media were −30, −30, −690, 
and −680 kPa for the
control, cold, salt, and drought treatments, respectively, 
as measured on a
Wescor-5100 vapor pressure osmometer (Wescor, Logan, Utah, USA). Seeds of
parental lines (NC84173 and LA722) and 
BC1 population were
surface-sterilized with 0.5% NaOCl solution for 10 minutes, rinsed with
sterile, distilled water, and briefly blotted. For each of the control, cold,
salt, and drought treatments 1000 seeds of 
BC1 generation
and 192 seeds of each of the parental lines were 
sown on germination media
under aseptic conditions. Each Petri plate contained 64 seeds and was
considered as one replicate. Petri plates were placed in a completely
randomized design (CRD) in incubators maintained in dark 
at either 20 ± 0.5°C (control, salt, and drought
treatments) or 11 ± 0.5°C (cold
treatment). Germination responses were scored 
visually as radicle protrusion at
8-hour intervals for 37 consecutive days. 
To estimate mean germination time,
germination distributions of the parental lines and 
BC1 population
in the four treatments were subjected to survival 
analysis, [19] and 
the time, in days,
to 
50% germination
was obtained for each replicate and averaged over replicates.2.3. Selection for rapid seed germination
under different conditions in BC1 generationIn each of the control, cold, salt, and
drought-stress treatments the 30 most rapidly 
germinating BC1 seeds (the
first 3% germinated) were selected (hereafter 
referred to as “selected
classes”). Selected seedlings from the different 
treatments were transplanted
into greenhouse seedling trays and subsequently into 
a field, where they were
grown to maturity and self-pollinated to produce 
BC1S1 progeny seed. The 
BC1S1 progeny were examined for rate of
seed germination under different conditions, as 
described elsewhere [8].2.4. Marker genotyping of the 
selected BC1 plantsLeaf tissue from each of the 120 selected BC1 plants was
collected for DNA isolation and marker analysis. Nuclear DNA was extracted using standard protocols for tomato [20]. DNAs were treated with RNAse and digested with 5
restriction enzymes, including DraI, EcoRI, EcoRV, HindIII, and XbaI according to the manufacturer's instructions and subjected to gel
electrophoresis. Genomic blots were prepared and hybridized with 119 DNA
probes, which previously were determined to detect polymorphism between the two
parents [21], including 112 random genomic or cDNA clones, obtained
from Steven Tanksley, Cornell University, Ithaca (NY, USA), and 7 germination
related cDNA clones, obtained from Kent Bradford, University of California (Davis,
Calif, USA). The RFLP markers were chosen so to have a good coverage of the 12
tomato chromosomes. Except for chromosomes 9 and 11, for which limited RFLP
polymorphism was identified between the two parents, at least 9 RFLP markers
were used for each chromosome. Probes were labeled with 32P-dCTP by
primer extension [22]. Agarose gel electrophoresis, Southern blotting,
hybridizations, and autoradiography were as described elsewhere [17].2.5. Marker genotyping of a nonselected BC1 populationA nonselected BC1 population
(N = 119) of the same cross (NC84173 ×LA722) was previously genotyped with 151 RFLP
markers, including the 115 markers used in the present study, and a genetic
linkage map was developed [21]. In the present study, marker
data from the previous mapping population were used to calculate allele
frequencies in a nonselected (random) BC1 population, which then
were used to calculate differences in marker allele frequencies between
selected and nonselected populations and identify QTL, as described below.2.6. Statistical
analyses and identification of QTLA selective genotyping approach was
employed to identify QTL affecting germination rate under control, cold, salt,
and drought conditions. The genotypes of the 30 selected BC1 plants
from each of the four selection treatments (control, cold, salt, and drought)
were determined for the 119 RFLP markers. Using the genotypic numbers obtained
for the 119 RFLP markers, marker allele frequencies were determined for each of
the four selected classes. The variance of allele frequency for each marker was
calculated as a binomial variance (sq2=pq/2N), 
where p and q are the
corresponding allele frequencies at a given marker locus and N is the number of individuals genotyped
at that locus [23]. Similar marker analyses were conducted
on the nonselected BC1 population
[21] and allele frequencies for
the 115 markers were calculated.Marker allele frequency differences
between each of the selected control, cold, salt, and drought classes and the
nonselected BC1 population (qS-qNS) were determined, where qS is the frequency of the ith allele at the kth marker locus in each of the selected classes (N = 30) and qNS is the frequency of the ith allele at the kth marker locus in the nonselected population (N = 119). 
Allele frequency differences
between the selected classes and the nonselected population were considered
significant when qS-qNS ≥2σq, where σq = (pSqNS/2NS +
pNSqNS/2NNS)1/2 is the standard
error of the difference between marker allele frequencies, NS is the number of BC1 progeny in each
selected class, and NNS is
the number of individuals in the nonselected BC1 population. This
test provides a confidence of more than 95% on the identified QTL [11, 14, 23, 24]. At each marker locus,
significant allele frequency difference between a selected class and the
nonselected population was inferred as an association of the marker locus with
a major QTL [12, 13, 17, 25]. However, in cases where qS-qNS was smaller than 2σq but
greater than 1σq, the marker was judged to be associated
with a QTL with minor effects.2.7. Estimation of QTL effectsWhile selective genotyping is more powerful than
standard marker-based (interval mapping) analysis in detecting linkage between
markers and QTL (primarily because of the use of large population), it is less
efficient in determining QTL effects. Individuals in the high class tend to
have a large number of positive QTL alleles and individuals in the low class
tend to have a large number of negative QTL alleles, and there is a deficiency
of individuals with a mixture of positive and negative alleles in the subpopulations
being analyzed (this is particularly true for traits with high heritability).
This deficiency hampers the ability to measure the effect of individual QTL
using traditional analysis of variance. However, the approximate effects of QTL
can be estimated using an equation that relates the change in marker allele
frequencies due to selection with the QTL effects (described below). This
equation assumes no recombination between the marker locus and the QTL. When
this assumption is met, the larger the effects of the QTL, the greater would be
the difference in marker allele frequency in response to selection. However, if
recombination occurs between the marker and the QTL, the effect of the QTL
would be underestimated.Falconer [23]
provided an expression relating the selection intensity, i, with the coefficient of selection, s, acting on an individual gene (or QTL) as follow:
(1)s=iD,
where D = 2 d/σP is the standardized effect of the QTL (in
phenotypic standard deviation unit, σP) and d is the phenotypic difference between the two homozygotes at the QTL. With
further substitution for s and
assuming no recombination between the marker and the QTL, the standardized
effect of a QTL, as a function of selection intensity and the difference in
allele frequencies at a linked marker resulting from a one-step directional
selection in a BC1 population, can be estimated as
(2)D=2δq[iq(1−q)],
where δq is the 
difference in marker allele
frequencies between a selected class and the nonselected population (i.e., qS-qNS), i is the selection intensity (i.e., standardized selection
differential), and q is the allele
frequency at the QTL-linked marker locus in the nonselected population. Using
this expression, the approximate standardized effects of the marker-linked QTL
(i.e., the difference between the two homozygotes at a QTL in standard unit)
was estimated. It should be noted that the calculated values are considered
minimum effects of QTL due to likely recombinations between markers and QTL.3. RESULTS3.1. Germination rates of the parental lines and BC1 progenySeed of the wild accession LA722 germinated
significantly more rapidly than seed of the breeding line NC84173 under nonstress (control) as well as cold, salt, and
drought stress conditions; the difference between the two parents, however, was
greater under stress than nonstress conditions (Table 1). This is consistent
with previous reports on germination rates of these and other lines [2, 6]. Seed of the BC1 population
germinated intermediate between the two parental lines, indicating the
inheritance of rapid germination from LA722 to the progeny (Table 1).3.2. Map constructionUsing a nonselected BC1 population (N = 119 individuals) of the same cross from a previous study [21] and the 119 RFLP markers scored in both the nonselected population and
the selected classes, a genetic linkage map was constructed using computer
program MAPMAKER v. 3.0 [26]. The procedure for map construction was similar to previous studies [21, 27]. This map covered 1172 cM of the 12 tomato chromosomes with 9.7 cM
distance between adjacent markers (see Figure 1), as estimated based on Kosambi
function [28].3.3. Identification of QTL for germination
under different conditions QTL
for germination under nonstress (control) conditions. Four 
major QTL (on chromosomes 1, 4, and 9)
and 3 minor QTL (on chromosomes 1, 5, and 11) were identified for germination
under nonstress conditions (see Table 2, Figure 1). All QTL for rapid seed
germination under nonstress conditions were contributed from the
rapid-germinating wild donor parent, LA722. The standardized effects (D) of the QTL ranged from 0.38 to 0.87 phenotypic
standard deviation.QTL
for germination under cold stress conditions. Three major QTL (on chromosomes 4, 8, and 9) and 6 minor QTL (on
chromosomes 1, 7, 9, 11,
and 12) were identified for germination under cold stress (see Table 2,
Figure 1). For all QTL, but two on chromosomes 4 and 8, the positive alleles
were contributed from LA722 (Table 2). The standardized effects (D) of the identified QTL ranged from
0.31 to 0.69 phenotypic standard deviation.QTL
for germination under salt stress conditions. Four major QTL (on chromosomes 5, 7, 9, and 11) and two
minor QTL (on chromosomes 4 and 12) were identified for germination under salt
stress (see Table 2, 
Figure 1). All QTL but one on chromosome 4 were
contributed from LA722 (Table 2). Furthermore, the QTL that was contributed
from the slow-germinating recurrent parent had smaller effects than those
contributed from the donor parent. The standardized effects (D) of the identified QTL ranged from
0.45 to 1.01 phenotypic standard deviation.QTL
for germination under drought stress conditions. Two major QTL (on chromosomes 8 and 9)
and seven minor QTL
(on chromosomes 1, 4, 5, 9, and 12) were identified for germination under
drought stress (see Table 2, 
Figure 1). For all QTL except three on chromosomes
4, 8, and 12, the positive alleles were contributed from LA722 (see Table 2,
Figure 1). Furthermore, QTL that were contributed from LA722 had generally
larger effects than those contributed from the slow-germinating cultivated
parent, NC84173. The standardized effects (D)
of the identified QTL ranged from 0.33 to 1.02 phenotypic standard deviation.3.4. Comparison of QTL across treatmentsA total of 14 QTL were identified with significant
effects on germination rate under one or more conditions. Of these, 4 QTL (29%)
affected only one trait and 10 QTL (71%) affected 2 or 3 traits. The QTL
affecting one trait included one on chromosome 1 affecting germination under
control (nonstress) condition, two on chromosome 8 affecting germination under
cold or drought stress, and one on chromosome 12 affecting germination under
drought stress. Three QTL affected 2 traits, including one on chromosome 4
affecting germination under drought and nonstress and one on each of
chromosomes 7 and 12 affecting germination under cold and salt stress. Seven QTL
(50% of the total) affected germination rate under three different conditions,
including 3 on chromosomes 1 and 9 affecting germination under cold, drought,
and control conditions, 2 on chromosomes 4 and 9 affecting germination under
cold, salt, and drought conditions, one on chromosome 5 affecting germination
under salt, drought, and control conditions, and one on chromosome 11 affecting
germination under cold, salt, and control conditions (see Table 2, Figure 1). Ten
of the 14 QTL (71%) were contributed from the fast germinating donor parent
(LA722) whereas four from NC84173.3.5. Germination
response of the BC1S1 progenyEvaluation of
the germination response of the BC1S1 progeny indicated
that selection for rapid seed germination under any of the four conditions in
the BC1 generation resulted in progeny with improved germination
under all four conditions (Table 3; [8]). The improvement in
germination rate of the selected BC1S1 progeny was
significant when compared to germination rate of the 
nonselected BC1S1 progeny (Table 3).4. DISCUSSION4.1. Number, genetic effect, and location of QTLThe power of selective genotyping in
detecting QTL depends on several factors, including heritability (h2) of the trait, gene
action, the type of mapping population, the intensity of selection, the number
and individual effects of QTL, the extent of marker coverage, and the distance
between marker loci and QTL affecting the trait [11, 13, 14, 17, 23]. In the present study, the use of a rather
large population (N = 1000), an intensive 
selection (p = 3%), and a relatively
good marker coverage provided sufficient power to detect many putative QTL. For
each trait, between 2 and 4 major QTL (i.e., dq ≥ 2σq) and 2–7 minor QTL (1σq ≤ dq < 2σq) were detected. However, due to moderate
heritabilities of these traits (h2 = 0.20–0.75; [8, 9]) and because trait evaluation was conducted in BC1 generation, where donor-parent QTL with recessive effects would not be
detected, it is likely that some QTL remained undetected. Therefore, the QTL
identified in this study for each trait should be considered the minimum number
of QTL affecting the trait. Additional QTL may be identified if advanced
populations such as recombinant inbred lines (RILs) or backcross inbred lines
(BILs) are used. Also, the calculated standardized effects of QTL (D; Table 2) should be considered lowest
estimates as the assumption of no recombination between markers and QTL may not
be valid in all cases. However, in a selective genotyping approach, the
accuracy of QTL-effect estimation can be greatly improved by using higher
density map, larger size population, and more advanced generation. This is also
true in case of interval mapping.The intervals for
a few QTL, including those identified on chromosomes 1 and 4, were rather large
(20–25 cM; see Figure 1). Whether each of these genomic regions contains one
QTL or multiple linked QTL could not be determined in this study. Similar to 
F2 generation, in BC1 generation of a cross between two inbred lines
linkage disequilibrium is large and consequently loosely-linked flanking
markers may also show association with QTL and it may not be possible to
determine the exact position of QTL [29]. This is a general concern
when using early segregating populations for genetic mapping, irrespective of
employing a trait-based (selective genotyping) or a marker-based (interval
mapping) analysis. However, the use of advanced segregating populations, such
as RILs or BILs in which linkage disequilibrium is reduced, large size
populations, and composite interval mapping approach [30, 31] is expected to provide for a better delineation
of QTL position.4.2. Comparison of QTL with those 
	 previously identifiedIn two previous studies,
using traditional interval mapping approach and backcross (BC1S1)
populations of the same cross as in this study, QTL were identified for rapid
seed germination under cold stress (on chromosome 1 and 4; [32]) and salt stress (on chromosomes 1, 9, and 12; 
[33]). The present study detected all of those QTL except one QTL on
chromosome 1 for germination under salt stress (see Figure 1). This high level
of consistency between the previous and present studies suggests the efficacy
of the screening methods and the reliability of the identified QTL. The present
study also identified a few additional QTL for these traits indicating a
greater power of selective genotyping in detecting QTL, primarily due to the
use of large populations and intense selections.4.3. Comparison of QTL affecting germination rate under different
conditionsTen
of the 14 identified QTL (71%) affected germination rate under 2 or 3 conditions,
of which 7 (50% of the total) affected germination rate under three different
conditions (Table 2, see Figure 1). This finding indicates the presence of
germination-related common QTL/genes in tomato which affect germination rate
under different conditions. The presence of common QTL suggests presence of
genetic relationships between the ability to germinate rapidly under different
conditions and the expectation that selection and improvement of seed
germination under one condition would lead to progeny with improved germination
under other conditions. This QTL-based prediction is in fact in agreement with
previous findings of presence of phenotypic and genetic correlations between
the rates of tomato seed germination under different conditions and with
results of selection experiments [6, 8, 9]. It is therefore concluded
that in tomato, the ability of the seed to geminate rapidly under different
stress and nonstress conditions is at least partially controlled by the same QTL.
However, whether the effects of common QTL were due to pleiotropic effects of
the same genes, physical linkage of different genes, or a combination of both
could not be determined in the present study. The finding of common QTL,
nonetheless, has fundamental and practical implications, as discussed below.In comparison, only 4 of the 14 QTL (29%) affected germination
only in one treatment (see Table 2, Figure 1). The identification of these QTL
suggests presence of genes which affect germination rate only under specific
environmental conditions. Interestingly, 3 of these 4 QTL, those on chromosomes
8 and 12, had the positive QTL alleles (for rapid germination) from the
slow-germinating recurrent parent. However, the paucity of such QTL and the
preponderance of QTL with common effects indicate the significance of genetic
factors which affect tomato seed germination under different conditions. This
genetic finding is in agreement with previous physiological studies of tomato
seed germination under different conditions, as discussed below.4.4. Physiological mechanisms of germination
under different conditionsExcessive salt in the
germination medium depresses water potential, making water less available to
the seed, which may reduce the rate or completely inhibit seed germination. Low
rate of germination under salt stress could be due to osmotic and/or ionic
effects of the saline medium. The available evidence, however, suggests that
low water potential of the germination medium rather than its ion toxicity
effects is the major limiting factor to germination under salt stress in
different crop species, including tomato [10, 34–36]. Furthermore, a more recent 
detailed investigation of tomato seed
germination under different stress conditions, using various ionic and nonionic
germination media with identical osmotic potential, confirmed that germination
rate was mainly affected by osmotic rather than ionic effects of the medium [37].Under drought stress, reduced
water potential of the germination medium is the cause of slow seed germination
[10]. This is similar to the condition under
salt stress. Therefore, it is not unexpected that seeds that withstand the low
water potential and germinate rapidly under drought stress also germinate
rapidly under salt stress, and vice
versa. This is also in agreement with the finding of a previous study
that indicated the presence of correlation (r = 0.82, P < .01) between
germination rate under salt and drought stress in tomato [8]. Therefore, it is likely that similar or
identical genes (and physiological mechanisms) may control the rate of tomato
seed germination under salt and drought stress. Support for this suggestion is
the observation of a significant improvement in germination rate under drought
stress in response to selection for rapid seed germination under salt stress,
and vice versa [8].Under cold stress, the delay in
seed germination could also be due to water stress as low temperature does
affect water status of the cell [38]. However, whether genetic and
physiological processes which impart rapid seed germination under salt and/or
drought stress also could facilitate rapid germination under cold stress is
unknown. In the present study, however, the finding that almost all QTL for
germination under cold stress colocalized with QTL for germination under salt
and/or drought stress suggests that the same genes (or physiological
mechanisms) may contribute to rapid seed germination under these three
conditions. This suggestion is consistent with the finding that selection for
rapid seed germination under salt or drought stress resulted in progeny with
improved germination rate under cold stress, and vice versa [8]. However, isolation, characterization, and
comparison of functional genes, which facilitate rapid seed germination under
the various conditions, are necessary in order to determine the exact genetic
relationships among these traits. Nonetheless, results of the present study
suggest presence of genetic relationships in the ability to germinate rapidly
under different stress conditions and that MAS for common QTL would lead to
progeny with improved germination rate under all these conditions.In the present study, 7 major
or minor QTL were identified affecting germination rate under nonstress
(control) conditions (see Table 2; Figure 1). Of these only one QTL (located on
the lower part of chromosome 1) affected germination only under the nonstress
condition whereas the rest affected germination under three (5 QTL) or two
conditions (1 QTL). Furthermore, as determined in this study, selection for
rapid seed germination under nonstress condition resulted in progeny that
germinated significantly faster than nonselected progeny under both nonstress
and stress (cold, salt, and drought) conditions (Table 3). These findings
suggest that at least some of the genes or physiological mechanisms which
facilitate rapid seed germination under nonstress conditions also contribute to
rapid germination under stress conditions. Furthermore, the previous findings
that selection under stress conditions resulted in progeny with faster
germination ability under nonstress condition [8, 9] suggest that genetic controls facilitating
rapid seed germination under stress conditions do not have undesirable effects
on performance in the absence of stress. These genetic findings are in
agreement with results of physiological studies of tomato seed germination,
which suggested involvement of common physiological mechanisms contributing to
rapid germination under different conditions [10]. It appears that seeds that have the desirable genetic
components for rapid germination tend to germinate rapidly under a wide range
of environmental conditions. It is, therefore, likely that MAS based on germination-related
common QTL would result in progeny with improved germination under both stress
and nonstress conditions.4.5. QTL with effects in opposite direction to the parental phenotypesFor
majority (71%) of the identified QTL, the positive alleles were contributed
from the rapid germinating donor parent, LA722. This was not surprising because
of the significant differences between the two parents in germination rate in
all four treatments (Table 1). However, t QTL (from a total of 14), located on chromosomes
4, 8, and 12, were identified for which the slow germinating parent (NC84173)
contributed the positive alleles for rapid germination (Table 2). Although the
number of positive QTL contributed from NC84173 was much smaller than that from
LA722, the results suggested the presence of potentially useful QTL for rapid
seed germination in the slow germinating parent. Such finding is not uncommon
and has been reported in the literature for many other traits in various plant
species. The identification of QTL with effects in opposite directions to the
parental phenotypes demonstrates the ability of marker analysis to uncover
cryptic genetic variation that otherwise would have been masked by the large
phenotypic differences between the parents. Furthermore, the presence of such QTL
suggests the likelihood of recovering transgressive variants in segregating
populations derived from crosses between contrasting parents.5. CONCLUSIONThe present study identified
between 6 and 9 QTL for each of the four germination traits. While four QTL
were identified, each affecting only one trait, the majority of the QTL (71%)
were common across the treatments and affected rate of seed germination under
two or three conditions. The identification of germination-related common QTL
indicates that the rate of tomato seed germination under different conditions
is at least partially under the same genetic controls, confirming previous
reports of presence of correlations among the rate of tomato seed germination
under different conditions. It further suggests that similar physiological
mechanism(s) may facilitate rapid seed germination under different conditions,
congruent with the findings of previous physiological studies of tomato seed
germination. It is, therefore, expected that tomato seed germinability under
different conditions can be improved by marker-assisted selection for common QTL.
In this regards, the seven QTL on chromosomes 1, 4, 9, and 11 which were
identified with effects on germination rate under three conditions (Table 2)
should be the most useful QTL for MAS improvement of tomato seed germinability
under different conditions.
